Topic #733493: 78th Place Solution: Neural Stochastic Path Generator
  Author: Yuki_ARL
  Posted: 2026-08-07 05:13:30.864000
  Votes: 1  Comments: 0

Final: private 78 / 6191 (silver). Public rank was ~1800.

This was the first competition in which I made full use of an AI agent, and it left a lasting impression on me. Since this article was generated by Claude, I may revise the wording later.

The 1700-place jump came from one decision: I refused to optimise against the public leaderboard, and submitted my best-CV model rather than my best-LB one. The private scores confirmed it exactly:




Submission
my CV
public LB
private




Submitted (this solution)
7.37
6.889
7.474


Earlier champion (best public LB)
8.20
6.553
9.896




Note the asymmetry. On the public LB these two are separated by 0.34 ft in the wrong direction  Ea gap I had already measured to be inside the noise floor of a ~52-well leaderboard. On private they are separated by 2.42 ft in the right direction, seven times larger. Choosing on the public LB would have cost the medal. Across my submissions the private ordering followed the CV ordering and contradicted the public LB repeatedly.

Solution TL;DR. A neural stochastic controlled differential equation samples 50 candidate TVT paths per fold, driven by increments of the observed features rather than by time alone, with Ornstein–Uhlenbeck coloured noise and a frozen tower supplying the per-well datum offset. The generator is then co-trained against an internal corrector, so the residual it leaves is not merely small but easy to correct. At inference nothing is selected: the candidate pool is collapsed to its mean, and ten observations derived from it  Eincluding a GR↔typewell soft blend  Edrive a closed-form quarter-sine ridge that corrects that mean. Three seeds are averaged. Finally, since dTVT = −dZ + θ·dh leaves structural dip as the only unknown, the path is refined coarse-to-fine by re-measuring dip in overlapping windows. Throughout: trust honest CV, not the public leaderboard.

Pipeline overview


Training, run independently for each of 3 seeds, all stages on a fixed epoch count:

  1.  offset tower        60 ep    per-well datum offset, anchored at the prefix end
          | freeze
  2.  NSCDE generator     60 ep    from scratch, offset tower held fixed
          | warm start
  3.  generator + corrector jointly   20 ep    gradient flows through the corrector


Inference:

   NSCDE generator (per seed)      M = 50 stochastic candidate paths / fold
        |                          pool mean = the path that gets corrected
        |                          -&gt; CV 10.642  (pool mean, uncorrected)
        |
   GR reranker                     soft blend of the pool
        |                          -&gt; an observer, NOT the output
        |
   quarter-sine corrector          10 observers -&gt; 21 features per mode,
        |                          mode-diagonal nested ridge
        |                          (external + frozen, not the head from stage 3)
        |
   3-seed uniform mean             -&gt; CV 7.7299
        |
   robust U-projection             U = TVT + Z, deg-6 IRLS-Huber
        |                          -&gt; CV 7.7077
        |
   sequential multi-scale dip correction
                                   -&gt; CV 7.3534


Everything up to the U-projection is the accumulated result of roughly 120 experiments. The dip stage came from one afternoon of writing down the physics, and is the largest single post-processing gain in the project  Ethough Section 3 explains why that is less impressive than it sounds.



1. Generator design



A neural stochastic controlled differential equation rolls out TVT increments window by window, sampling M = 50 paths per fold rather than emitting a point estimate. There are three input paths, and keeping them straight is the key to reading the diagram:



Encoder input  E19 geometric window features, standardised. A Transformer with ALiBi positional bias (4 layers, 4 heads, d_model = 64) maps them to a per-window context, over windows of 30 rows. Two scaled prior-window features are concatenated on, giving a 66-dimensional conditioning vector.

Control path  Ethe increments of [19 features ++ an 8-coefficient encoding of the GR curve in the window], i.e. a 27-dimensional dX per window. This is what makes it a CDE rather than an SDE: the drift is driven by observed change, not by elapsed depth.

Level path  Ea 6-window summary of the prefix tail feeds the separate, frozen offset tower that supplies the per-well datum constant. It never touches the drift.


The state is 4-dimensional and the update is

dy   = 0.20 * clamp( A(ctx, y, t) . dX  +  f(ctx, y, t) * dt ,  30 )
eta  &lt;- a * eta + sqrt(1 - a^2) * eps,          a = exp(-kappa * dt),  kappa = 0.5
y    &lt;- y + dy + sigma * sqrt(dt) * eta


A is not a fixed matrix: a FiLM-conditioned MLP (2 layers, hidden 128) emits the whole 4 ÁE27 sensitivity matrix at every step from [ctx 66, y 4, t 1]. So the model does not learn "how TVT drifts with depth"  Eit learns how TVT responds to each observed change, given where it currently thinks it is. The 0.20 scale and the clamp are what keep a matrix-valued drift stable over a 5000 ft rollout.

Four choices did the work, and each of them was a correction to something that failed first.

Colour the noise. With independent white noise per window the candidate cloud is wide but every member of it is individually implausible  Ethe paths wander in a way no geological surface does. Nothing downstream can then make sense of the pool: its mean is smeared, and every observer built from it degenerates into noise. Ornstein–Uhlenbeck noise with mean-reversion kappa = 0.5 makes consecutive perturbations persist, so each sample becomes a self-consistent hypothesis about the surface rather than a random walk. This is the difference between a candidate pool and noise.

Separate level from shape, then freeze the level. The prediction is a per-well constant plus a shape, and the two are learned by different networks. A separately-trained offset tower predicts that constant  Ethe datum offset of the well, anchored at the prefix end  Eand is frozen while the generator trains, so the generator only ever has to produce the shape. Left coupled, it spends its capacity fighting the datum ambiguity instead. It is also the single largest block of parameters in the model (148,290 of 400,277), which is a fair measure of how much of this problem is level rather than shape. Related: injecting a true level prior gives a very large improvement, while my best estimated prior gives none  Eprior injection here is a quality-threshold problem, not a design question, and it is worth knowing which side of the threshold you are on before building machinery around it.

Fixed epochs, no early stopping. Training is a three-stage chain per seed  Eoffset tower (60 epochs), then freeze it and train the generator (60 epochs), then warm-start and co-train generator and corrector jointly (20 epochs). All three use a fixed epoch count. That removes the need for an inner-validation split, so every training well contributes to the fit. What makes this safe is step-level EMA with decay 0.999: the averaged checkpoint is stable enough that early stopping was buying nothing. EMA alone was worth ∁E.10 ft.

Uniform seed averaging, not learned aggregation. Three seeds, combined by plain mean. I tried learning the combination and it lost. With ~600 wells per fold, anything fitted on top of the ensemble overfits; the simplest possible aggregator was also the best one.

How the corrector is co-trained

The third stage is worth describing properly, because it is the one part of the pipeline where the generator is trained against something other than the truth.

What is jointly trained. I warm-start from the stage-2 generator and train it together with an internal corrector head for 20 fixed epochs. The gradient path matters: the corrector's inputs  Eits additive term B and the encoder context  Eare not detached, so gradient flows through the corrector and back into the generator. The generator can therefore learn to emit residuals that are easy for a corrector to explain, rather than merely small.

That is not a hypothesis, and separating it from ordinary fine-tuning needs one extra measurement. Project the residual  Etruth minus the generator's path  Eonto the 5-mode quarter-sine basis to get, per well, the coefficients c* that a perfect corrector would apply. Two numbers then describe the corrector's job:



var(c*)  Ehow much correction the well needs at all;

R² = 1 ∁EE‖c* ∁Eĉ‖² / E‖c*‖², measured out-of-fold  Ewhat fraction of that the corrector can actually predict.


A better generator can move either one, and they mean different things: shrinking c* leaves less to fix, whereas raising R² makes what remains foreseeable. Measured on two screening folds:





corrected RMSE
R² (predictable fraction)




frozen generator (baseline)
8.9276
0.375


warm fine-tuning only, no joint
9.3283
0.319


joint, gradient through B only
8.8099
0.396


joint, gradient through the corrector inputs too
8.5578
0.410




The second row is the control that isolates the effect: fine-tuning without the joint objective makes things worse, so the joint term is worth ∁E.483 on its own. And the third row raised R² while leaving var(c*) unchanged  Ethe generator was not shrinking the residual, it was reshaping it into something the corrector could read. That is a channel a frozen generator cannot access even in principle, and it is the reason the stage exists.

Asymmetric learning rates. The generator moves at 0.3ÁEthe base LR and the head at 2.0ÁE Steering harder destabilises; steering more softly (0.1ÁE keeps the score but loses the R² gain entirely  Ei.e. it reverts to ordinary fine-tuning. The joint loss is the usual winner-take-all path term (weight 1.0) plus a final-prediction term (1.0) and a small correlation term (0.1), with a linear output head and no shrinkage.

The internal corrector is not the deployed corrector, and that is deliberate. At deployment the generator writes out its candidate pool, and the correction applied to that pool's mean is computed by an external, frozen, mode-diagonal nested ridge  Ethe quarter-sine corrector described below. The internal head exists only to shape the generator during training, and is small enough (7,340 parameters, 1.8% of the model) that it could not be doing the real work anyway. This removes the standard failure mode of joint training: a generator that games its own observer gains nothing, because the thing that actually corrects it at test time never saw that collusion. Making the internal observer easy to fool is penalised, not rewarded.

2. Blending and correction

This stage is easy to describe wrongly, so here is what actually happens. The candidate pool is never used to pick a winner. It is collapsed into a mean path, and everything else the pool knows enters a linear corrector as a set of observations:

pred_base = mean over the candidate pool          (5 folds x 50 paths = 250 per seed)
pred_gr   = GR-reranked soft blend of the pool    &lt;- an OBSERVER, not the output
final     = pred_base + Q @ c_hat                 c_hat from a closed-form ridge


The reranker's output never becomes the prediction. It contributes exactly one of ten observation vectors. I built a hard selector first; the soft-blend-as-a-feature version was strictly better, and in hindsight the reason is obvious  Ewith a shallow, noisy score, committing to an argmax throws away the fact that the runners-up were nearly as good.

2.1 The reranker score

The typewell is first turned into a local reference around the tie-in depth: keep only samples within ±200 ft of the last known TVT, then Gaussian-smooth with tau = 5 ft onto a 0.5 ft grid, producing a mean curve mu(TVT), a spread sd(TVT) and the distance to the nearest real sample. This matters  Ematching against the raw typewell far from the tie-in point is matching against extrapolation.

Each candidate path y is then scored with three terms:

score(y) = value(y) + 1.0 * lag(y) + 0.01 * ( dist(y) / 10 ft )^2




value  Eread mu at the candidate's TVT, form the robust residual z = (GR_observed ∁Emu) / sigma_GR with a per-well MAD sigma, and take a Huber mean (delta = 1.5) over rows with typewell coverage. Candidates covering less than 30% of rows are dropped outright.

lag  Ethe best Pearson correlation between observed GR and the reference over depth shifts of ±10 ft (step 2 ft), penalised by 0.002 * shift^2. This asks "does the shape line up, allowing a small registration error?", which the value term alone cannot see.

proximity  Esquared distance from the pool mean, in units of 10 ft. A weak prior against candidates that wander far from consensus.


The surviving candidates are combined by a Boltzmann-weighted mean with temperature 0.10:

w_k     = exp( -( score_k - min score ) / 0.10 ),   normalised
pred_gr = sum_k w_k * path_k


I spent an enormous amount of effort trying to improve this stage  Elearned rerankers, end-to-end differentiable rerankers, leak-free feature selectors, DTW gates, sequential GR rerankers  Eand all of it failed. A shuffle control explains why: for a fixed candidate pool, scoring with shuffled GR performs as well as scoring with real GR. The local GR channel at this resolution is empty for selection, and no amount of architecture fixes that. 

What survives is narrower than that sounds. The reranker's output still earns a place downstream, but look at where. Across the three seeds the ridge puts about half of that observer's weight on the lowest quarter-sine mode and three quarters on the lowest two, and ranks it seventh of the ten observers overall (7.5% of the total coefficient mass). GR cannot tell you which candidate is right, but the direction it wants to pull still carries real information about the overall tilt  Ewhich is why it is passed on as an observation rather than allowed to choose.

2.2 A second, independent tracker: the likelihood particle filter

Half the corrector's observers come from a particle filter that has nothing to do with the neural generator, so it is worth introducing on its own.

It is a likelihood-weighted PF ensemble: 128 independent seeds ÁE500 particles, each particle carrying a TVT hypothesis that is propagated along the well and weighted by how well the observed GR matches the typewell read at that hypothesis. Each seed returns one path and one total log-likelihood, and the seeds are then combined at a temperature s:

w_k          = exp( ( logL_k - max logL ) / s ),  normalised
pf_scale_s   = sum_k w_k * path_k


Small s is a committed, near-MAP answer; large s hedges towards a plain average over seeds. Running it at s = 3, 5, 8, 12 therefore produces four readings of the same evidence at four levels of confidence, which turns out to be more informative than any single one of them.

Two variants are used. The raw PF matches against the typewell as given. The pseudo PF first affine-calibrates the typewell GR to this well's heel section (where TVT is known) and blends the two, which removes the tool-to-tool GR scale mismatch before any matching happens.

2.3 What the corrector actually corrects

The corrector adds a low-dimensional shape in the anchored quarter-sine basis, over the normalised evaluation interval u in [0, 1]:

Q_k(u) = sin( (2k-1) * pi * u / 2 ),        k = 1 ... 5


Every Q_k(0) = 0, so the correction vanishes at the prefix end and grows toward the toe  Ematching the physical fact that uncertainty accumulates with distance from the last observation. Five modes are enough: 95% of the squared error lives in this subspace.

The job is therefore to predict five numbers per well. Every observation is projected into the same five-dimensional space by least squares, so an observer is a 5-vector, not a scalar  Ethe corrector can learn "this observer is informative about the overall level but not about curvature".

The ten observers.




#
observer
what it is
dim




1-4
ps3 / ps5 / ps8 / ps12
QS projection of pred_base ∁Epf_scale_s for the pseudo PF at temperatures s = 3, 5, 8, 12. Four readings of where the neural pool mean and an independent physical tracker disagree, at four confidence levels
5 each


5
rw8
the same at s = 8 but from the raw PF (uncalibrated typewell)
5


6
gr
QS projection of pred_gr ∁Epred_base  Ethe direction and size of the move the GR reranker wanted to make
5


7
bpref
the prefix-level offset estimate, broadcast across modes
5 (const)


8
regpath
GR-to-typewell registration field, read out directly in the QS basis
5


9
poe
product-of-experts registration score combining independent depth-shift experts
5 (const)


10
kb_cstar
local quadratic curvature of the GR-likelihood surface  Ehow sharply peaked the match is, z-scored
5 (const)




All ten are differences or agreements between things the model already computed. None of them is a raw feature of the well. That is deliberate, and it is the single most transferable idea here: I separately measured 74 methods that summarise a well into a fixed-length feature vector and predict the correction from that, and every one of them scored R² of about zero. Disagreement between two estimators carries signal that neither estimator's own features do.

The spread interaction  E21 features per mode. Let

u  = log( mean pointwise std of the candidate cloud )
uz = ( u - mean ) / std                                 (z-scored over training wells)


Then for each mode k the design vector is

x_k = [ obs_1[k], ..., obs_10[k],  obs_1[k]*uz, ..., obs_10[k]*uz,  uz ]     -&gt; 21 features


so the corrector sees every observer twice: once on its own, and once multiplied by how uncertain the generator was. That is the whole point. When the candidate cloud is tight the generator is confident and its observers should be believed; when the cloud is wide they should be discounted. A single global weight per observer cannot express that, and it is worth more than any extra observer I tried adding.

The estimator. Per mode, standardise x_k, then a closed-form ridge:

c_hat_k = intercept_k + z_k . w_k


Mode-diagonal: mode k's coefficients see only mode k's projections  Eno cross-mode terms. And nested: the ridge for a held-out fold is fitted without any of that fold's wells.

Both restrictions were forced on me. Cross-mode coupling overfit consistently, and replacing the closed-form solve with a learned head cost more than it gained on ~600 wells per fold. The learned head earns its keep during co-training, where it only has to shape a gradient; it loses as the thing that actually computes the correction.

2.4 U-projection

Working in U = TVT + Z removes the wellbore's own vertical motion and leaves the marker-surface elevation, which should be smooth in space. A degree-6 polynomial fitted by IRLS with a Huber loss cleans up residual jitter without moving the level.

This chain reached CV 7.7077, from a generator pool mean of 10.642.

3. The diagnosis that explained the ceiling

Let S(x, y) be the marker-surface elevation. Since TVT = S ∁EZ, along the trajectory:

TVT(t) = TVT(p) ∁E[ Z(t) ∁EZ(p) ] + integral of theta(h) dh   from the prefix end p to t


where theta is the dimensionless structural dip along the well azimuth and h is horizontal distance from the prefix end. Both dZ and dh are known at test time  Ethe only unknown is the scalar field theta.

Measuring oracles in that space  Ethat is, asking how well each representation of dip could do if you knew it perfectly:




Representation of theta
Oracle RMSE




theta = 0 (carrier only)
107.49


Constant theta per well
7.5924


My model at that point
7.7077 ↁEessentially identical


theta linear in h
4.2811


theta piecewise-constant, 4 segments
2.7466


theta piecewise-constant, 8 segments
1.5895




After 120 experiments the model had converged to the best possible constant-dip solution and was capturing none of the within-well dip variation. All that architecture work had been happening inside a constant-dip world without my knowing it. That is the single most useful thing I did all competition, and it cost an afternoon: subtract the part you already know, and look at what is actually left.

Acting on it gave 7.7077 ↁE7.3534  Emeasuring the dip in overlapping windows by cross-correlating the observed GR against the typewell read at a trial dip, then integrating. Three practical points, since the naive version does not work:



Softmin, not argmin. The mismatch curve is shallow and noisy; the argmin jumps between local minima and destroys the magnitude even when the sign is right. A Boltzmann-weighted mean over the whole curve gives shrinkage for free (a flat curve yields zero automatically) and its weighted variance is a usable per-window confidence.

Coarse-to-fine, and re-measure each time. Three scales applied sequentially, each measuring from the path the previous stage produced. Computing all components from the original path and summing them instead loses 0.12 ft; iterating a single scale saturates 0.07 ft short; reversing the order costs 0.09 ft. The scale hierarchy is the mechanism, not the iteration.

A principled smoother lost to a crude one. A linear-Gaussian RTS smoother over the window measurements, with the softmin variance as measurement noise, scored worse than a precision-weighted moving average  Eand nested selection drove its process noise to the maximum, i.e. "please do not smooth".


Do not read this as a large win, though. Against the oracle window dip my measurement achieves corr = 0.071 (shuffle control: 0.007), while substituting the oracle window dip into the same machinery reaches 1.82. The decomposition has enormous headroom and the entire bottleneck is that one correlation. Any proposal in this family should be rejected unless it answers: how does this raise corr = 0.071?

Also worth stating plainly: the correction slightly degrades already-accurate wells (+0.08 ft on the 435 wells below RMSE 5) and substantially fixes bad ones (∁E.13 ft on the 10 E0 band). For a squared-error metric that is the right trade, but 44% of wells end up marginally worse.

4. Making my own number trustworthy

RMSE differences of 0.1 ft are easy to manufacture by accident. Four guards, all of which I would use again:

Nested CV. Well-group 5-fold; every hyperparameter chosen from inner folds only.

Shuffle control through the identical pipeline. Re-run the entire procedure  Esame grids, same fold-nested selection  Ewith the horizontal GR permuted. Real: ∁E.354 ft. Shuffled: ∁E.011 ft. A 32ÁEseparation, so the tuning machinery alone cannot have fabricated the gain. This is the single cheapest guard available and I ran it on everything.

Doubly-nested selection. The remaining worry is that I chose the configuration by looking at all 773 wells. So I hid each outer fold completely and selected both the configuration and its scaling from the inner folds only. Honest CV 7.3688 against a deployed 7.3534  Ejust +0.015 ft of configuration-selection optimism, because all 5 folds independently chose the same configuration.

Well bootstrap, 20,000 paired resamples. At the full 773-well scale the final improvement is ∁E.354 ft with P(΁E&lt; 0) = 1.000. Resampled down to the public LB's ~52-well scale, the same improvement would look like a regression about one time in eight. That single number is the quantitative reason not to steer by the public leaderboard.

No comments
